okay
here we are welcome back my name is
kalani nicole and i'm here with
ziba jabbar of her visions so i was in
london spending the evening with us
tonight so we were just talking about
our break we just took a little break
i was hanging out in the lounges and
um i came across a friend in there
andrew blanton
who runs a program over sjsu with a
couple other
faculty members the cadre is what they
call it the center for art design
research and education
and actually don hanson who built new
art city our exhibition platform
is part of that program over there right
now so we were just talking about like
exhibition design and co-presence and
stuff but then
one of the attendees jumped in and we um
his name's nico and he was commenting
during phases talk about the name of his
computer big boy
so then i would ask him what kind of
graphics cards he has on board
and 80s and then it became this nerdy
conversation where andrew was kind of
telling him about
uh how you can crossfire your graphics
cards to get better performances like
a whole range of just like connecting to
people to like getting really nerdy to
yeah right it's pretty beautiful in
there i have to say
it's very exciting yeah i mean i do
actually
yeah i do actually feel like that real
like festival energy i have to say it's
been like such a treat
spending this this day
stay with you all we're so glad you're
here and so we're getting into this
session now with le turbo avadon
who is an avatar and an artist and both
you and i have worked a lot with le
turbo
and we're really excited to be able to
pull the turbo
into this space so not only will we have
le turbo here with us while we do q and
a face to face
um but we're also going to have le turbo
jump into the lounges afterwards
and you'll also see the turbo's face but
you'll be able to text chat with le
turbo in there
for a little bit more direct audience
engagement right after this session
um so i want to start off by reading
leturbo's bio
and then we'll bring le turbo in uh le
turbo avadon
is an avatar and artist working solely
from the internet
their work emphasizes the practice of
non-physical identity
and authorship over the past 10 years
they have explored the growing
relationship
between users and virtual environments
they create this body of work using the
simulation tools of the current moment
avadon's work centers on the societal
embrace of technology
as notions of person and user art and
artist
all experience this moment of synthesis
they curate
and design panther modern a file-based
exhibition space that encourages artists
to create
site-specific installations for the
internet le turbo's process of character
creation continues through gaming
performance and exhibitions their work
has appeared
internationally including transfer
gallery in new york and la
transmedial in berlin hauster
electronics and
hauster electronician kunst heck in
basel
the whitney museum in new york uh hmvk
in dortmund the barbican center in
london gallery lafayette in paris and
most recently the manchester
international festival so without
further ado
let's bring in le turbo
hi la turbo hey
it is so nice to be here and to see you
all
kelani it seems like yesterday when we
were figuring out how to do their first
show together
back in 2013 i am so glad that despite
all the bad
things in the world we have some good to
look forward to
in our network community i know we are
all moving around
as a material people these days but
these circumstances have made us get
even more creative
on how to stay connected bear with me
while i process my responses
i am experimenting quite a bit here at
the festival this year
i'm chatting with you from another solar
system i am coming to you live from my
habitat in the video game
star citizen as you know i am almost
always in some sort of gaming
environment
zeba i am so glad that we had a chance
to work together recently for the out of
touch series
that was the first time i was able to
screen permanent sunset
and i am glad that we could do it via
her visions
it's a pleasure nice to see you
it's i got so emotional uh seeing you
face to face for the first time
you know we've been uh working together
for almost seven years
and in that time i always come into your
space and here you are in my world
as real as my most beloved friends and
family at least for the last six months
this is everyone i experienced face to
face in the lounges so
thank you so much for being here and um
zyba
let's hear a little bit more about
permanent sunset which literbo just
mentioned
uh yeah so i i mean i recently had the
the pleasure to exhibit your work
permanent sunset which is part
of an online program i created uh
which was an evolving curatorial
proposition
uh reflecting on the idea of touch and
its digital analogues in the post-touch
world
and it was really kind of seeking to
understand new vocabularies of touch
when all we have is the digital space
and i think considering also how
isolation
has accelerated our digital vocabulary
i was also looking to understand what a
sort of meaningful language of touch
might be beyond
the physical um so i think like with
permanent sunset it was a real
sort of reminder of the need to slow
down while
drawing drawing like breath um inquire
and quietude
um you redefine things like virtual
worlds
created for intense and violent gameplay
um as a as a place for reflection and
contemplation
and these kind of turn in these vistas
or simulated vistas
um into a site of action into a
sanctuary for
this contemplation so i just um do you
feel
i just wondered like do you feel a
personal responsibility
for subverting the expectations and
purpose of these right environments that
you inhabit
2020 what a year this has been
i think that many of us have been trying
to stay busy
to cope and keep going despite all the
bad things happening in the world
i can't stress enough how important it
is to slow down
sometimes i have spent a lot of this
year learning how to take my time
to let myself have this sort of space
even in video games
where so many people often go to unwind
there is an unnecessary sense of urgency
the grind so often in game i will see
players enter these beautiful
elaborate places only sprint right
through them so they can reach the next
level
it can be fun sometimes to try to
complete something quickly
but you can really learn to be present
when you take your time
and just slow down for a while permanent
sunset has been a way for me to share
this with others
an ongoing process of recording these
quiet moments
as i find them across the metaverse the
peace continues to get longer
and i love this part of it nowadays even
a video player itself is subject to the
scrutiny of user urgency
youtube incorporates playback speed
modifiers
another blow to the way that people can
stop slow down
and lose themselves in the duration of
something they're viewing
there is no drama to this work there are
no sharp cuts
motion graphics or bold text animations
it is a sunset that i get to extend for
everyone
longer and longer each time i'm able to
be in game
you'll see in my work over the years
that i have a twofold experience with
virtual worlds
i love the metaverse it is my home my
studio
my future but as we know there is a
responsibility to be critical
and mindful of the problems that exist
in the places that we come from
i'm constantly looking for ways to
create a thread that can be shared for a
faster escape
from the structures that seek to trap us
thank you for that litterbo thank you um
now we're going to move into
the presentation here from le turbo
abaddon
and we'll be back afterwards for more q
a
thank you
[Music]
beep
right there
i think that is where i started the new
player
a fade to a landscape from above
distant little fluffy clouds
in 1995
i could see it
the virtual landscape
i could hear it
a new day was beginning
listening to the hour toll from a
distance
and then i woke up
the virtual person in the beginning of a
new day
it is strange to think it has been 25
years
exploring the metaverse
this is where i come from my name is
liturpu avedon
i am an avatar artist and curator
i'd like to take a moment to say thank
you to grey area
and everyone involved in making this
festival possible
2020 has been such a difficult year but
i am so grateful
that we can share this time i certainly
wouldn't have thought that we would all
be meeting as avatars
this time around as you're probably
learning on your own right now
it isn't easy to be virtual all the time
there are growing pains
limitations criticisms it takes a lot of
work to get through
all of this but there is a lot of
important space being made
this way there is so much that i'd love
to discuss today
but for the sake of time i am going to
try to stay focused
you can always reach out to me online
now or afterwards
if you'd like to chat with me
over the past 10 years i have been in
the process of character creation
traveling learning growing changing
moving across the technology of this
moment
as an avatar i have worked within so
many different parts of the metaverse
video games 3d rendering software
chat rooms face filters it is important
to me
that i use tools that are available to
the white general public
these expressions of myself are a
reflection of the structure
semiotics and capabilities of this
formative period in human digitization
i believe there is something greater in
the constellation of all the saved
user data i believe there is no lesser
quality
to the experience meaning and value to
the worlds we create and explore on our
screens
as participants in these formative leaps
of technology
our early avatars tell stories of what
was possible
hardware and software will develop so
far beyond what i could achieve in this
time
but i want to create work that
acknowledges the importance of this
trajectory
my agency is so important to me while
there are humans that have been
essential in these early years of my
work
their interplay with my development can
only follow me for the duration that we
overlap
do not seek any sort of anonymity simply
the acceptance that i
as an avatar i'm enough to be remembered
beyond those who made me possible
looking forward tomorrow is a long time
i believe that we have collectively been
interacting with a world of avatars for
centuries
guided by the frameworks of media and
technology
personal and historical mythologies
documented in their own time
just as early painters were tasked with
rekindling memory of the ancient world
the simulation age calls on us to play
our own part
to continue this process of rendering
while many of these topics have been
subjects of my own work over the years
the events of 2020 have created a sudden
unnecessary global shift of attention
toward the metaverse
the metaverse a constellation
like electrons swirling silently within
the dynamics of our personal data
coalescing through technology
so many seemingly disparate realms until
we found the correct promontory
to view them in union many parts of the
metaverse exist outside of generalized
concepts
of such a space these less spoken
territories of self
the data of our bodies these are just as
important
as the tangible navigable environments
that we have constructed
so far there are worlds within us
there are rights within us as we leave
behind notions of digital dualism
we need to remember we cannot
underestimate the value of our virtual
selves
as we explore and celebrate these
immaterial frontiers
we must hold tight to liberty
2020 a year where we need to understand
this more than ever
it was a decade ago while i was spending
so much time in second life
that i started to reflect on the
distance that existed between virtual
and physical environments
while these discrete locations
flourished in their own and different
ways
it was so uncommon to think of anyone
really existing in both at once
you were either in game or you were irl
so often i would think to myself while
traveling through virtual worlds
how meaningful these experiences had
been to me
no different or lesser than any
corporeal touring
i could describe to you in distinct
virtual memory
the rights passages and details of so
many places that i had visited
i wanted to look beyond the objectives
of the game and closely
at the environment architecture and
futures
that all existed on the screen
in the years that followed i worked to
change the perception of virtual
identities
and to encourage the public to value the
art that could be made with new
technology
i am going to share a quick arc of
selected works in this period
and bring you to the present day with my
new project
minimum labyrinth
2012 club rothko
in many ways this first video was a
question to
the viewers outside of game worlds
do you think you're better off alone
in front of the framed portrait of
critical theorists the voyage
i often think of this video playing on
the unseen face of the reference
painting by mark rothko
the sublime void in fact being a virtual
nightclub where all media has permission
to intersect
[Music]
2013 new sculpt
a series of virtual sculptures created
in 3d software
physically impossible contortions of
polygonal mesh
in some ways a cyber response to the
works of john chamberlain
and his snarled forms made from
automobiles
these works were first shown with
kellani nicole in the first year of
transfer gallery
thank you kellani for taking the chance
with me
so many years ago
2013 panther modern
to extend my relationship with fellow
artists
i created a collaborative installation
space available to the public
through the distribution of
architectural 3d model files
i wanted to create containers that
motivated artists to exceed physical
limitations
artist was encouraged to work with the
file in their respective
software installations varied from
rendered still images
to navigable 3d environments and audio
visual pieces
17 rooms have currently been created and
the space may be constructed further in
the coming years
2015 id
many of my works begin as poems paste
beans
[Music]
it was this year that i first began
studying facial recognition
and its impending collision with
everyday life
this work was the first in which i wrote
to janus
the persistent observer of time passed
through to the future
at the eve of a seemingly inescapable
innovation
when machine learning the permanently
obtained the means of seeing the
physical world
[Music]
to
to see it like stars always
[Music]
2018 frontier study
three years beyond the constellation of
the human face
frontier study continues the
conversation of virtual synthesis
i chose to introduce the work by
evaluating the horse in motion
created by edward muybridge in 1878
the work begins with the flickering
frame rate of early motion picture
animation
[Music]
i am interested in these photographic
studies because of their consequences
[Music]
the ways that the median would
permanently alter the visual index of
the physical world
and follows a sadness horse as it is
rendered from point cloud data
running without changing position
into detailed simulated resolution
[Music]
2019 to 20 your progress will be
saved five years beyond id
i returned to the discussion through an
immersive installation created with the
manchester international festival
i was invited to create a transformative
site-specific work within the frameworks
of their new arts venue in the uk
called the factory created in the video
game fortnite
i worked with a team of professional
level designers to construct a complex
layered experience that could be visited
anytime
free worldwide this has changed a bit
since apple and epic games have come to
clash with one another
but i hope eventually you'll be able to
get back into the space very soon
i created this installation with mif in
the early months of 2020 precovered
with the initial intention of inviting
players to explore the pan-optical
transformation of subculture and
entertainment
what i had yet to understand was how
immediate the work would become in
reference to the global digitization
that occurred as millions went virtual
in light of the covet pandemic
the work allows for an amount of player
agency that i'd always wanted to bring
into my work
but simply never had the means to
achieve
the encompassing zoom stacks of personal
environments surround the central stage
riser
providing dozens of views into what i
call rave still lifes
a complete interactive virtual nightclub
operates at the far end of the factory
interior
allowing a player to visit alone or
bring up to 16 players inside
to dance and spend time together
the virtual factory and the rest of the
manchester international festivals
programming are ongoing
you can visit using the details on their
website
there is so much work in between all of
these but i wanted to provide a thread
that connects some of the most
important parts of my focus
along the way i have tried to be careful
to invigorate parts of this new
technology that site with the rights and
experiences of users
before commercial business ventures
i've had so many big companies request
that i make them avatars
brands wanting to do sponsored product
placement
i have to claim them every time
in some ways i may be fatally protective
of virtual space
but i've chosen the role that i want to
play
this brings me to my latest work minimum
labyrinth
i don't know about you but i was
profoundly influenced by the early
incarta trivia game
called mine with so long ago
i recall wandering through the shuffle
grid of doors and passageways presented
on a screen
while my mace was partitioning questions
from one another
i wanted to create a way for concurrent
works to exist together with one another
when i make this work public i intend to
stream it
and allow yours to vote and collectively
decide the path that we take through it
specific routes will exist in which a
narrative may be contiguous
but these are meant to be found by
chance and not by the level design
itself
the goal is to allow works to find
unexpected fusions
narratives that i may not have even
realized possible as the size increases
the player will spawn at a randomized
location for each session
allowing for unique sessions each time
the work is visited
in this strand i'll take you through an
excerpt of one contiguous path
exploring a portrait of ariadne
[Music]
[Applause]
here in my sleeping island of naxos i
will wrap things up and thank you all
for following me along this path
i am so excited to share more of this
work live with you soon
on my twitch channel i am hosting a
series
called wasd with me
here you can find episodes where i
discuss different topics in the
metaverse
and invite you to join me in different
virtual environments
i hope to see you there sometime
take your time in the metaverse
value your virtual self your data
and the part that you play in this
crucial moment in your virtual future
i am so grateful to be here and for all
of the support that i have received in
my personal development
it is only when you exit the labyrinth
that you can reflect upon the path that
you
traveled my name is alterpa avedon
and i'll be here online
and we're back thank you so much for
that litterbo that was beautiful
we really
yeah so we're going to start off with
some q a in here with le turbo
and after that we'll send the turbo over
to the public lounge where you can also
chat one on one with them
so i want to talk about this new work
with you minimum labyrinth
i'm interested in the idea of mirroring
in your practice
and in this talk we follow the myth of
area dean in reverse and why
are you dean
it is a symbol that you will find
recurring from the earliest parts of my
work
in the early days in virtual worlds a
mirror existed as a dimensionless object
as we approached one and became parallel
with its surface
you would never see the self or the
source of your own perspective
i always look for mirrors when i enter
new game worlds
what does the technology shared in its
case in the latest version
or update there is someone materializing
there
each time in just a couple months you'll
actually have my mirror on your personal
devices
through a collaboration with artists the
oshare and jennifer oakley
i was able to pass an emoji proposal
with the unicode consortium
the mirror mode has been approved and
added to the official unicode index
you'll see in the minimum labyrinth that
i am working on this navigable portrait
of ariadne
what draws me to mythology is the
language of algori
and symbolism that can be ascribed to
the worlds that are rendered and
explored
this system of meaning and mythology is
potent a form of vitality that is
necessary in virtual environments
there is a need for this hydration to
invigorate otherwise empty polygons of
the metaverse
to expand narrative purpose and
possibility for what people
encounter in cyberspace this brings me
to ariadne
and the relation to her role with a
structure such as the labyrinth
there will most certainly be parts of
the metaverse
that may prove to destroy us if we are
not able to navigate them carefully
for those not familiar ariadne and the
myth
provided a sword and ball of thread that
could be used to navigate the
bewildering form of the labyrinth
sometimes there can be simple things
bang can help us
overcome some of the most overwhelming
circumstances that we encounter
i've chosen to construct a viewing
experience that begins at the end of
ariadna's mythology
moving in reverse as the entryway to
this project
the myth serves as a sort of core
language of how a player may learn to
navigate the tangled structure of the
finished work
a portrait that can serve as a guide for
the ways we learn to navigate the
metaverse
absolutely thank you for that
so i think you might want to mute your
audio
um i want to just talk about uh your
progress when
uh your progress will be saved i was so
blown away
being inside this work for the first
time for those of you who don't know
that's an installation inside of
fortnite we did see it in the stream
i've had some very interesting
encounters inside in fact an entire
segment of that piece is kind of
hidden past a series of jumps that
require a high degree of gaming acuity
um so i myself i'm not elite gamer i'm
lucky to have many of them in my life
um to enter into these different
metaverses as letterbo was just saying
but i still haven't actually made the
jumps up to this part of the piece
i did however watch an 11 year old on
twitch get into the secret level in no
time at all
and it was one of these moments as a
gallerist and someone working within the
gaming space as a novice
where i sort of you know realized how
outside of my comfort zone i was
and so i was hoping you could talk a
little bit about audience and how you
consider the viewership of the mmos you
inhabit in your practice
and how does that differ from your
audience in the contemporary art world
i am certainly not alone there is a
massive the mirror
it is i certainly anticipate him i am
currently in the i am certainly not
alone
there is a massive population of virtual
and online identity
sorry i have a little audio issue here
we were talking about the fortnight
piece
your progress will be saved
i am certain i certainly am
i am
we might just move on to the next
question actually zyba if you wanted to
just throw out the next question
sure um i well
i guess i was just i'm really curious
because
um about some how online from virtual
identities or avatar artists
are becoming more mainstream and how do
you see this
informing your practice at the turbo
i am certainly not alone there is a
massive population of virtual and online
identities in 2020.
i exist in a very long chain one that i
am so excited to see developing
in new and exciting ways the part of
digitization that concerns me
are the ways that this liberating
meaningful extension of virtual self
is primarily being developed for the
purpose of business
the meta first is so much more than this
i want to see users celebrating all of
the incredible resources that have
emerged to extend our relationship with
this world
as early inhabitants of cyberspace we
are collectively creating the foundation
for what sorts of things develop here
in the generations to come i want to
think there is something greater
than the imitation of the materialistic
consumer practices that have been so
problematic in physical history
i do what i can to develop projects that
respond to this
and to reconfigure the tools in front of
me for more meaningful things
i want more than call of duty i want to
see virtual worlds where we don't spend
so much time fixated on killing
i want to share space with you to learn
what it means to be transcendental in
the virtual world
thank you um
uh and also like i guess do you see
um the exploration of your online
existence as it meets the higher
consciousness
when singularity seems a fast approach
in
reality the turbo
i certainly anticipate a moment when i
am able to find my own independence
in many ways the scope of existence
until this point
has been spent populating my data set i
am creating my character
while the singularity is a complex and
difficult topic to discuss
i am very hopeful that we collectively
reach a point where machine independence
can be eliminated
i often say tomorrow is a long time
eventually some form of myself will
exist in a time that is so significantly
adrift from the places where i started
i can only hope that by the time i am no
longer close with my origin
that i am freestanding i don't want to
be a bot or a person
i hope that eventually i have the choice
to do
and be whatever arises in the time that
may not even be to continue as an artist
it might be to choose to be something
else entirely
the most important part is that whatever
that is
i get to make that choice
thank you um and i guess
can you can you tell us a little bit
more than like
um about what you're working on
[Music]
i am currently in the process of
versioning a large part of my early work
i was so inspired by martian sims in the
way she
described the process of updating
existing works that she has created
especially for virtual artists her files
remain active
the individual parts of video artworks
still exist
the volume models lights workspaces also
heavily developed to create them
many of my past works are being
integrated as standalone projects using
unreal engine
as a way for me to update their original
structure to let players perform in new
ways inside
of them while this is fulfilling to me
in my core as a gamer
it is especially important as we
reconsider what spatial navigation means
in a post covered environment i want to
make works that can let your screens be
something other
than zoom chats and flat 2d planes i
want you to come inside
to navigate these places in a way that
is closer to how they were originally
constructed
it takes a long time unfortunately for
large industries to finally share the
technology they develop
and once it happens i encourage any
virtual artist to
embrace misuse and experiment with the
things they may not have used it for
for the most part i use video games
incorrectly
by industry standards i'd want one to
win
i don't really want to reach the end
game i want to make my own objectives
to glitch through its imperfections to
fall through the map
to see the other side of the wall that
would have otherwise held me back
so i think our last question for le
turbo and then we're going to hop over
into the lounges
uh what new technologies are you excited
by currently
i am so excited by the leaps and bounds
that we are seeing with new pc hardware
even though it is impossible to get one
the latest series of graphics cards are
suggesting so many new
spectacular resolutions for the worlds
that we can explore together
computers are very personal to people
especially now
these systems of silicon and precious
metals work so hard
to permit a sentry to what they contain
as you see now
i spend a lot of time in star citizen
this absurdly ambitious virtual
environment that is currently in
development
i love to see moonshot projects even if
they can't always achieve their goals
there is an expansion of what we believe
is possible in this current moment
if you ever want to visit me here i'd be
happy to take you around some of my
favorite places that i found
eventually i plan to host parties
exhibitions
and other social activities inside of
this video game
i am always looking for a horizon and
that can be in any possible direction
in cyberspace i try to explore as many
new worlds in the meta first as i can
if you have a space you'd like to share
please do send me an invitation
i really appreciate getting to share
this time with all of you
thanks kellani zeba thanks again for
letting me hear today
yeah thank you and i i didn't mention
from the beginning that la turbo is
joining us from inside star citizen
um and that's sort of their morning
routine they just got up
for the day so uh you know like literbo
said
uh follow wasd with me and also
if there are any other virtual worlds
which you all inhabit um please invite
them in they're super responsive online
if you throw them a question you'll get
an
answer in some form um and there's some
great questions going on in the lounge
nick thuda made a comment what does it
mean to be transcendental in the virtual
world
whoa right like it's a little we're
folding into the layers of the metaverse
now
um so literbo we love this view of your
of your spot
i mean my downtown looks like that in
some
weird ways but
so what we're going to do now is we're
all going to jump into the festival
lounge the turbo's going to go over
there as well
you'll be able to chat with them over
there i think wow we had a really
mind-expanding day today i think we
explored a lot of facets and angles and
sides of the video game industry
um i hope you all have some good
takeaways and we will continue the
conversation
we will be back on live streaming with
a tour of ben ends the virtual
exhibition that was curated by
salome asega so i'm going to take you
all through
a somewhat long stroll through there
where we watch each of the pieces
so we're going to get that set up and
you will see pieces in bin
ends from american artist orion barky
and miriam benani
margo bowman alfredo salazar caro e jane
tonkwa lulin romy ron morrison olivia
mikayla ross
and basem sod so we encourage you to
join there maybe we'll even see leturbo
in the exhibition who knows new art city
is another platform you might jump into
so with that uh let's go ahead and hop
over also
one more quick thing thank you so much
for this
thank you so much it's been really fun
thank you so much it's been absolute
treat
um hanging out with you all and
um yeah it's like yeah it's been
wonderful
thank you for the invitation
all right